README.md, before:

<div align='center'>

# Better SceneRF
**Self-Supervised Monocular 3D Scene Reconstruction with Radiance Fields**  
_Original Authors:_ [Anh-Quan Cao](https://anhquancao.github.io), [Raoul de Charette](https://team.inria.fr/rits/membres/raoul-de-charette/)   
_Inria, Paris, France._  

</div>

**This repository is a personal fork of the official [SceneRF](https://github.com/astra-vision/SceneRF) repository.**  
Please note that the changes described below are _not_ part of the official SceneRF repository and are _not_ endorsed by the original authors.

---
## Fork Changelog

This project was completed as a part of the **Machine Learning for 3D Geometry (IN2392)** course at **TUM**.

### **Enhancements in SceneRF Performance**  

- Implemented **Random Fourier Features positional encoding** and **Hierarchical Sampling** (alongside existing sampling techniques) to significantly enhance **novel depths synthesis, novel views synthesis, and scene reconstruction** in SceneRF.
- Also tried **Multihead Self Attention** in Spherical-UNet, but it didn't improve the results because we didn't have alot of data and compute to train it for longer.
- Also modified the original implementation to **train the model** on **TUM-RGBD** dataset.
- Please checkout the project report [here](docs/BetterSceNeRF.pdf).
- These improvements yield better performance on BundleFusion dataset, as shown in the following table:

<img src="assets/outputResults.png">

- The **best results** are highlighted with **bold** font.
- **Original results** are taken from the SceneRF paper.
- **Scaled-down results** correspond to a scaled-down model using the configuration in `train_eval_bash_scripts/train_bundlefusion_scaled_down.sh`.

### **Additional Modifications**
Below is a summary of the modifications introduced in **this fork** to support additional features and datasets. **All credit for the original work goes to the original authors.**

1. **Dataset Argument for TUM RGB-D**  
   - A new `--dataset` argument has been introduced to:
     - `scenerf/scripts/train_bundlefusion.py`
     - `scenerf/data/bundlefusion_dm.py`
     - `scenerf/data/bundlefusion_dataset.py`
   - This allows for selecting between **BundleFusion** (`bf`) and **TUM RGB-D** (`tum_rgbd`) during training and data loading.

2. **Modified Evaluation and Reconstruction Scripts**  
   - Added a `--dataset` argument to:
     - `scenerf/scripts/evaluation/save_depth_metrics_bf.py`
     - `scenerf/scripts/evaluation/agg_depth_metrics_bf.py`
     - `scenerf/scripts/evaluation/render_colors_bf.py`
     - `scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/generate_novel_depths_bf.py`
     - `scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/depth2tsdf_bf.py`
     - `scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/generate_sc_gt_bf.py`
     - `scenerf/scripts/evaluation/eval_sc_bf.py`
   - This makes it possible to perform the same depth/TSDF/color metrics evaluations on the TUM RGB-D dataset using a BundleFusion-like format.

3. **TUM RGB-D to BundleFusion Conversion**  
   - **New File:** `convert_tum_to_bf/tum_to_bf`  
   - Script to convert the **TUM RGB-D** dataset into a BundleFusion-like directory structure, including:
     - Pose conversion
     - Depth scaling
     - Converting `color.png` to `color.jpg`

4. **Random Fourier Features Positional Encoding**  
   - **New File:** `scenerf/models/pe_rff.py`
   - **Modified Files:** `scenerf/models/scenerf_bf.py` (to implement rff positional encoding).
   - Implements **Random Fourier Features** for positional encoding, providing an alternative to standard positional encodings.

5. **Hierarchical Sampling**  
   - **Modified Files:** `scenerf/scripts/train_bundlefusion.py` (added a `--n_pts_hier` argument) and `scenerf/models/scenerf_bf.py` (to implement hierarchical sampling).
   - Implements **Hierarchical Sampling** alongside uniform and probabilistic sampling.
   - Allows specifying the number of points for hierarchical sampling directly from the command line.
   - Probabilistic sampling could sometimes overly concentrate on specific surface areas, leading to an imbalanced focus. Hierarchical sampling refines the uniform sampling points, ensuring a more even distribution near surfaces and improving overall reconstruction quality.

6. **Self Attention**
   - **Modified Files:** `scenerf/models/unet2d_sphere.py` (to implement multihead self attention in the u-net bottleneck).

7. **Training and Evaluation Bash Scripts**
   - **New File:** `train_eval_bash_scripts/train_bundlefusion_scaled_down.sh` (to train the model with scaled down configuration)
   - **New File:** `train_eval_bash_scripts/eval_bundlefusion_scaled_down.sh` (to evaluate the model)
   - Change paths in the bash scripts accordingly.
   - Train either the **BundleFusion** (`bf`) and **TUM RGB-D** (`tum_rgbd`) dataset by selecting (`bf`) or (`tum_rgbd`) in the bash scripts.

8. **Assets**
   - **New Directory:** `assets` (to save evaluation results)

---

<div align='center'>

# Original SceneRF README

</div>

Please refer to the original [SceneRF repository](https://github.com/astra-vision/SceneRF) for the most up-to-date official code and instructions. The following sections are from the original SceneRF README (with minor adaptations to reflect the presence of the fork).

----

<div align='center'>

# SceneRF: Self-Supervised Monocular 3D Scene Reconstruction with Radiance Fields

ICCV 2023

[Anh-Quan Cao](https://anhquancao.github.io)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
[Raoul de Charette](https://team.inria.fr/rits/membres/raoul-de-charette/)  
Inria, Paris, France.  

[![arXiv](https://img.shields.io/badge/arXiv%20%2B%20supp-2212.02501-purple)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.02501) 
[![Project page](https://img.shields.io/badge/Project%20Page-SceneRF-red)](https://astra-vision.github.io/SceneRF/)

</div>

If you find this work or code useful, please cite our [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.02501) and [give this repo a star](https://github.com/astra-vision/SceneRF/stargazers):
```bibtex
@InProceedings{cao2023scenerf,
    author    = {Cao, Anh-Quan and de Charette, Raoul},
    title     = {SceneRF: Self-Supervised Monocular 3D Scene Reconstruction with Radiance Fields},
    booktitle = {ICCV},
    year      = {2023},
}
```

# Teaser
<!-- ![](./teaser/method.png) -->
<img style="width:500px;max-width:100%" src="./teaser/teaser.png">
<table>
<tr>
    <td align="center"><b>Outdoor</b> scenes</td>
    <td align="center"><b>Indoor</b> scenes</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td style="width:50%!important">
        <img style="width:100%" src="./teaser/outdoor.gif">
        <!-- <img style="width:100%" src="./teaser/outdoor2.gif"> -->
        <!-- <img style="width:100%" src="./teaser/outdoor3.gif"> -->
    </td>
    <td style="width:50%!important">
        <img style="width:100%" src="./teaser/indoor.gif" />
        <!-- <img style="width:100%" src="./teaser/indoor2.gif" /> -->
    </td>
</tr>
</table>


# Table of Content
- [News](#news) 
- [Installation](#installation)
  - [Conda](#using-conda)
  - [Docker](#using-docker)
- [Dataset](#dataset)
  - [KITTI](#kitti-dataset)
  - [Bundlefusion](#bundlefusion-dataset)
- [Training](#training)
  - [KITTI](#train-kitti)
  - [Bundlefusion](#train-bundlefusion)
- [Evaluation](#evaluation)
  - [KITTI](#evaluate-kitti)
      - [Pretrained model](#pretrained-model-on-kitti)
      - [Novel depths synthesis](#novel-depths-synthesis-on-kitti)
      - [Novel views synthesis](#novel-views-synthesis-on-kitti)
      - [Scene reconstruction](#scene-reconstruction-on-kitti)
  - [Bundlefusion](#evaluate-bundlefusion)
      - [Pretrained model](#pretrained-model-on-bundlefusion)
      - [Novel depths synthesis](#novel-depths-synthesis-on-bundlefusion)
      - [Novel views synthesis](#novel-views-synthesis-on-bundlefusion)
      - [Scene reconstruction](#scene-reconstruction-on-bundlefusion)
  - [Mesh extraction and visualization](#mesh-extraction-and-visualization)
- [Acknowledgment](#acknowledgment)

# News
- 05/12/2023: Check out our recent work [PaSCo: Urban 3D Panoptic Scene Completion with Uncertainty Awareness](https://astra-vision.github.io/PaSCo/) :rotating_light:
- 24/08/2023: Add code for Bundlefusion
- 14/07/2023: SceneRF has been accepted at [ICCV 2023](https://iccv2023.thecvf.com/)
- 15/03/2022: A new version of SceneRF is [available on arXiv.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.02501) :mega:. Code will be updated soon!
- 10/03/2022: We have included [instructions for drawing the mesh](https://github.com/astra-vision/SceneRF#mesh-extraction-and-visualization)

# Installation
## Using Conda

1. Create conda environment:

```
$ conda create -y -n scenerf python=3.7
$ conda activate scenerf
```
2. This code was implemented with python 3.7, pytorch 1.7.1 and CUDA 10.2. Please install [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org/): 

```
$ conda install pytorch==1.7.1 torchvision==0.8.2 torchaudio==0.7.2 cudatoolkit=10.2 -c pytorch
```

3. Install the dependencies:

```
$ cd scenerf/
$ pip install -r requirements.txt
```
4. Install tbb
```
$ conda install -c bioconda tbb=2020.2
```

5. Downgrade torchmetrics

```
$ pip install torchmetrics==0.6.0
```

6. Finally, install scenerf:

```
$ pip install -e ./
```

## Using Docker
Make sure the docker daemon is installed and running on your local machine.

1. Build docker container
```
$ docker build -t scene-rf .
```

2. Run interactive container session
```
$ docker run -it scene-rf
```

If the container should be deleted after usage, the ```-rm``` flag can be used.
If GPUs are available, the ```--gpus all``` flag can be used.
For more information, follow this [LINK](https://docs.docker.com/config/containers/resource_constraints/)


# Dataset
## KITTI dataset
1. To train and evaluate novel depths/views synthesis, please download on [KITTI Odometry website](http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/eval_odometry.php) the following data: 
    - Odometry data set (calibration files, 1 MB)
    - Odometry data set (color, 65 GB)
    - Odometry ground truth poses (4 MB)
    - Velodyne laser data, 80 GB

2. To evaluate scene reconstruction, please download **the SemanticKITTI voxel data (700 MB)** and **all extracted data for the training set (3.3 GB)**  on [Semantic KITTI download website](http://www.semantic-kitti.org/dataset.html).

3. Create a folder to store preprocess data at `/path/to/kitti/preprocess/folder`.

4. Store paths in environment variables for faster access (**Note: folder 'dataset' is in /path/to/kitti**):    

    ```
    $ export KITTI_PREPROCESS=/path/to/kitti/preprocess/folder
    $ export KITTI_ROOT=/path/to/kitti 
    ```
## Bundlefusion dataset
1. Please download 8 scenes from [Bundlefusion website](https://graphics.stanford.edu/projects/bundlefusion/) and unzip them to `/gpfsdswork/dataset/bundlefusion` (change to your dataset directory).
2. Store paths in environment variables for faster access:    
    ```
    $ export BF_ROOT=/gpfsdswork/dataset/bundlefusion
    ```

# Training
## Train KITTI
1. Create folders to store training logs at **/path/to/kitti/logdir**.

2. Store in an environment variable:

    ```
    $ export KITTI_LOG=/path/to/kitti/logdir
    ```

3. Train scenerf using 4 v100-32g GPUs with batch_size of 4 (1 item per GPU):

    ```
    $ cd scenerf/
    $ python scenerf/scripts/train_kitti.py \
        --bs=4 --n_gpus=4 \
        --enable_log=True \
        --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS \
        --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
        --logdir=$KITTI_LOG \
        --n_gaussians=4 --n_pts_per_gaussian=8  \
        --max_epochs=50 --exp_prefix=Train
    ```
## Train Bundlefusion

1. Create folders to store training logs at **/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/logs/monoscene2/bundlefusion** (Change to your directory).

2. Store in an environment variable:

    ```
    $ export BF_LOG=/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/logs/monoscene2/bundlefusion
    ```

3. Train scenerf using 4 v100-32g GPUs with batch_size of 4 (1 item per GPU):

    ```
    $ cd scenerf/
    $ python scenerf/scripts/train_bundlefusion.py --bs=4 --n_gpus=4 \
        --n_rays=2048 --lr=2e-5 \
        --enable_log=True \
        --root=$BF_ROOT \
        --logdir=$BF_LOG
    ```

# Evaluation
## Evaluate KITTI
Create folders to store intermediate evaluation data at `/path/to/evaluation/save/folder` and reconstruction data at `/path/to/reconstruction/save/folder`.

```
$ export EVAL_SAVE_DIR=/path/to/evaluation/save/folder
$ export RECON_SAVE_DIR=/path/to/reconstruction/save/folder
```
### Pretrained model on KITTI
Please download the [pretrained model](https://www.rocq.inria.fr/rits_files/computer-vision/scenerf/scenerf_kitti.ckpt).
    
### Novel depths synthesis on KITTI
Supposed we obtain the model from the training step at `/path/to/model/checkpoint/last.ckpt`. We follow the steps below to evaluate the novel depths synthesis performance. 
1. Compute the depth metrics on all frames in each sequence, additionally grouped by the distance to the input frame.

```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/save_depth_metrics.py \
    --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
    --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS \
    --model_path=/path/to/model/checkpoint/last.ckpt
```
2. Aggregate the depth metrics from all sequences.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/agg_depth_metrics.py \
    --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
    --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS
```

### Novel views synthesis on KITTI
Given the trained model at `/path/to/model/checkpoint/last.ckpt`, the novel views synthesis performance is obtained as followed:
1. Render an RGB image for every frame in each sequence.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/render_colors.py \
    --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
    --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS \
    --model_path=/path/to/model/checkpoint
```
2. Compute the metrics, additionally grouped by the distance to the input frame.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/eval_color.py --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR
```
### Scene reconstruction on KITTI
1. Generate novel views/depths for reconstructing scene.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/generate_novel_depths.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
    --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS \
    --model_path=/path/to/model/checkpoint \
    --angle=10 --step=0.5 --max_distance=10.1
```

2. Convert the novel views/depths to TSDF volume. **Note: the angle, step, and max_distance should match the previous step.**
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/depth2tsdf.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
    --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS \
    --angle=10 --step=0.5 --max_distance=10.1
```
3. Compute scene reconstruction metrics using the generated TSDF volumes.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/eval_sr.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
    --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS
```


## Evaluate Bundlefusion
Create folders to store intermediate evaluation data at `/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/eval` and reconstruction data at `/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/recon`.

```
$ export EVAL_SAVE_DIR=/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/eval
$ export RECON_SAVE_DIR=/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/recon
```

### Pretrained model on Bundlefusion
Please download the [pretrained model](https://www.rocq.inria.fr/rits_files/computer-vision/scenerf/scenerf_bundlefusion.ckpt).
    
### Novel depths synthesis on Bundlefusion
Supposed we obtain the model from the training step at `/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/last.ckpt` (Change to your location). We follow the steps below to evaluate the novel depths synthesis performance. 
1. Compute the depth metrics on all frames in each sequence, additionally grouped by the distance to the input frame.

```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/save_depth_metrics_bf.py \
    --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT \
    --model_path=/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/last.ckpt
```
2. Aggregate the depth metrics from all sequences.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/agg_depth_metrics_bf.py \
    --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT
```

### Novel views synthesis on Bundlefusion
Given the trained model at `/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/last.ckpt`, the novel views synthesis performance is obtained as followed:
1. Render an RGB image for every frame in each sequence.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/render_colors_bf.py \
    --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT \
    --model_path=/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/last.ckpt
```
2. Compute the metrics, additionally grouped by the distance to the input frame.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/eval_color_bf.py --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR
```


## Scene reconstruction on Bundlefusion
1. Generate novel views/depths for reconstructing scene.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/generate_novel_depths_bf.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT \
    --model_path=/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/last.ckpt \
    --angle=30 --step=0.2 --max_distance=2.1
```

2. Convert the novel views/depths to TSDF volume. **Note: the angle, step, and max_distance should match the previous step.**
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/depth2tsdf_bf.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT \
    --angle=30 --step=0.2 --max_distance=2.1
```
3. Generate the voxel ground-truth for evaluation.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/generate_sc_gt_bf.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT
```

4. Compute scene reconstruction metrics using the generated TSDF volumes.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/eval_sc_bf.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT
```

## Mesh extraction and visualization
Mesh can be obtained from [this line for KITTI](https://github.com/astra-vision/SceneRF/blob/main/scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/depth2tsdf.py#L107) and from [this line for Bundlefusion](https://github.com/astra-vision/SceneRF/blob/main/scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/depth2tsdf_bf.py#L119) , and drawed with open3d as following:
```
import open3d as o3d

mesh = o3d.geometry.TriangleMesh()
mesh.triangle_normals = o3d.utility.Vector3dVector(data['norms'])
mesh.vertices = o3d.utility.Vector3dVector(data['verts'])
mesh.triangles = o3d.utility.Vector3iVector(data['faces'])
mesh.vertex_colors = o3d.utility.Vector3dVector(data['colors'].astype(np.float) / 255.0)

o3d.visualization.draw_geometries([mesh])
```



# Acknowledgment
The work was partly funded by the French project SIGHT (ANR-20-CE23-0016) and conducted in the SAMBA collaborative project, co-funded by BpiFrance in the Investissement d’Avenir Program. It was performed using HPC resources from GENCI–IDRIS (Grant 2021-AD011012808, 2022-AD011012808R1, and 2023-AD011014102). We thank Fabio Pizzati and Ivan Lopes for their kind proofreading and all Astra-vision group members of Inria Paris for the insightful discussions.

Commit message:

Update README with project details and contributions
Added project completion details and key contributions.

README.md, after:

<div align='center'>

# Better SceneRF
**Self-Supervised Monocular 3D Scene Reconstruction with Radiance Fields**  
_Original Authors:_ [Anh-Quan Cao](https://anhquancao.github.io), [Raoul de Charette](https://team.inria.fr/rits/membres/raoul-de-charette/)   
_Inria, Paris, France._  

</div>

**This repository is a personal fork of the official [SceneRF](https://github.com/astra-vision/SceneRF) repository.**

This project was completed as a part of the **Machine Learning for 3D Geometry (IN2392)** course at **TUM**.

## Key Contributions
- Improved the performance of SceneRF by 16% for novel depths synthesis, \% for novel views synthesis and 7% scene reconstruction, on BundleFusion dataset.
- Modified the original implementation to train the model on TUM-RGBD dataset as well.

---
## Fork Changelog

### **Enhancements in SceneRF Performance**  

- Implemented **Random Fourier Features positional encoding** and **Hierarchical Sampling** (alongside existing sampling techniques) to significantly enhance **novel depths synthesis, novel views synthesis, and scene reconstruction** in SceneRF.
- Also tried **Multihead Self Attention** in Spherical-UNet, but it didn't improve the results because we didn't have alot of data and compute to train it for longer.
- Also modified the original implementation to **train the model** on **TUM-RGBD** dataset.
- Please checkout the project report [here](docs/BetterSceNeRF.pdf).
- These improvements yield better performance on BundleFusion dataset, as shown in the following table:

<img src="assets/outputResults.png">

- The **best results** are highlighted with **bold** font.
- **Original results** are taken from the SceneRF paper.
- **Scaled-down results** correspond to a scaled-down model using the configuration in `train_eval_bash_scripts/train_bundlefusion_scaled_down.sh`.

### **Additional Modifications**
Below is a summary of the modifications introduced in **this fork** to support additional features and datasets. **All credit for the original work goes to the original authors.**

1. **Dataset Argument for TUM RGB-D**  
   - A new `--dataset` argument has been introduced to:
     - `scenerf/scripts/train_bundlefusion.py`
     - `scenerf/data/bundlefusion_dm.py`
     - `scenerf/data/bundlefusion_dataset.py`
   - This allows for selecting between **BundleFusion** (`bf`) and **TUM RGB-D** (`tum_rgbd`) during training and data loading.

2. **Modified Evaluation and Reconstruction Scripts**  
   - Added a `--dataset` argument to:
     - `scenerf/scripts/evaluation/save_depth_metrics_bf.py`
     - `scenerf/scripts/evaluation/agg_depth_metrics_bf.py`
     - `scenerf/scripts/evaluation/render_colors_bf.py`
     - `scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/generate_novel_depths_bf.py`
     - `scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/depth2tsdf_bf.py`
     - `scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/generate_sc_gt_bf.py`
     - `scenerf/scripts/evaluation/eval_sc_bf.py`
   - This makes it possible to perform the same depth/TSDF/color metrics evaluations on the TUM RGB-D dataset using a BundleFusion-like format.

3. **TUM RGB-D to BundleFusion Conversion**  
   - **New File:** `convert_tum_to_bf/tum_to_bf`  
   - Script to convert the **TUM RGB-D** dataset into a BundleFusion-like directory structure, including:
     - Pose conversion
     - Depth scaling
     - Converting `color.png` to `color.jpg`

4. **Random Fourier Features Positional Encoding**  
   - **New File:** `scenerf/models/pe_rff.py`
   - **Modified Files:** `scenerf/models/scenerf_bf.py` (to implement rff positional encoding).
   - Implements **Random Fourier Features** for positional encoding, providing an alternative to standard positional encodings.

5. **Hierarchical Sampling**  
   - **Modified Files:** `scenerf/scripts/train_bundlefusion.py` (added a `--n_pts_hier` argument) and `scenerf/models/scenerf_bf.py` (to implement hierarchical sampling).
   - Implements **Hierarchical Sampling** alongside uniform and probabilistic sampling.
   - Allows specifying the number of points for hierarchical sampling directly from the command line.
   - Probabilistic sampling could sometimes overly concentrate on specific surface areas, leading to an imbalanced focus. Hierarchical sampling refines the uniform sampling points, ensuring a more even distribution near surfaces and improving overall reconstruction quality.

6. **Self Attention**
   - **Modified Files:** `scenerf/models/unet2d_sphere.py` (to implement multihead self attention in the u-net bottleneck).

7. **Training and Evaluation Bash Scripts**
   - **New File:** `train_eval_bash_scripts/train_bundlefusion_scaled_down.sh` (to train the model with scaled down configuration)
   - **New File:** `train_eval_bash_scripts/eval_bundlefusion_scaled_down.sh` (to evaluate the model)
   - Change paths in the bash scripts accordingly.
   - Train either the **BundleFusion** (`bf`) and **TUM RGB-D** (`tum_rgbd`) dataset by selecting (`bf`) or (`tum_rgbd`) in the bash scripts.

8. **Assets**
   - **New Directory:** `assets` (to save evaluation results)

---

<div align='center'>

# Original SceneRF README

</div>

Please refer to the original [SceneRF repository](https://github.com/astra-vision/SceneRF) for the most up-to-date official code and instructions. The following sections are from the original SceneRF README (with minor adaptations to reflect the presence of the fork).

----

<div align='center'>

# SceneRF: Self-Supervised Monocular 3D Scene Reconstruction with Radiance Fields

ICCV 2023

[Anh-Quan Cao](https://anhquancao.github.io)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
[Raoul de Charette](https://team.inria.fr/rits/membres/raoul-de-charette/)  
Inria, Paris, France.  

[![arXiv](https://img.shields.io/badge/arXiv%20%2B%20supp-2212.02501-purple)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.02501) 
[![Project page](https://img.shields.io/badge/Project%20Page-SceneRF-red)](https://astra-vision.github.io/SceneRF/)

</div>

If you find this work or code useful, please cite our [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.02501) and [give this repo a star](https://github.com/astra-vision/SceneRF/stargazers):
```bibtex
@InProceedings{cao2023scenerf,
    author    = {Cao, Anh-Quan and de Charette, Raoul},
    title     = {SceneRF: Self-Supervised Monocular 3D Scene Reconstruction with Radiance Fields},
    booktitle = {ICCV},
    year      = {2023},
}
```

# Teaser
<!-- ![](./teaser/method.png) -->
<img style="width:500px;max-width:100%" src="./teaser/teaser.png">
<table>
<tr>
    <td align="center"><b>Outdoor</b> scenes</td>
    <td align="center"><b>Indoor</b> scenes</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td style="width:50%!important">
        <img style="width:100%" src="./teaser/outdoor.gif">
        <!-- <img style="width:100%" src="./teaser/outdoor2.gif"> -->
        <!-- <img style="width:100%" src="./teaser/outdoor3.gif"> -->
    </td>
    <td style="width:50%!important">
        <img style="width:100%" src="./teaser/indoor.gif" />
        <!-- <img style="width:100%" src="./teaser/indoor2.gif" /> -->
    </td>
</tr>
</table>


# Table of Content
- [News](#news) 
- [Installation](#installation)
  - [Conda](#using-conda)
  - [Docker](#using-docker)
- [Dataset](#dataset)
  - [KITTI](#kitti-dataset)
  - [Bundlefusion](#bundlefusion-dataset)
- [Training](#training)
  - [KITTI](#train-kitti)
  - [Bundlefusion](#train-bundlefusion)
- [Evaluation](#evaluation)
  - [KITTI](#evaluate-kitti)
      - [Pretrained model](#pretrained-model-on-kitti)
      - [Novel depths synthesis](#novel-depths-synthesis-on-kitti)
      - [Novel views synthesis](#novel-views-synthesis-on-kitti)
      - [Scene reconstruction](#scene-reconstruction-on-kitti)
  - [Bundlefusion](#evaluate-bundlefusion)
      - [Pretrained model](#pretrained-model-on-bundlefusion)
      - [Novel depths synthesis](#novel-depths-synthesis-on-bundlefusion)
      - [Novel views synthesis](#novel-views-synthesis-on-bundlefusion)
      - [Scene reconstruction](#scene-reconstruction-on-bundlefusion)
  - [Mesh extraction and visualization](#mesh-extraction-and-visualization)
- [Acknowledgment](#acknowledgment)

# News
- 05/12/2023: Check out our recent work [PaSCo: Urban 3D Panoptic Scene Completion with Uncertainty Awareness](https://astra-vision.github.io/PaSCo/) :rotating_light:
- 24/08/2023: Add code for Bundlefusion
- 14/07/2023: SceneRF has been accepted at [ICCV 2023](https://iccv2023.thecvf.com/)
- 15/03/2022: A new version of SceneRF is [available on arXiv.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.02501) :mega:. Code will be updated soon!
- 10/03/2022: We have included [instructions for drawing the mesh](https://github.com/astra-vision/SceneRF#mesh-extraction-and-visualization)

# Installation
## Using Conda

1. Create conda environment:

```
$ conda create -y -n scenerf python=3.7
$ conda activate scenerf
```
2. This code was implemented with python 3.7, pytorch 1.7.1 and CUDA 10.2. Please install [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org/): 

```
$ conda install pytorch==1.7.1 torchvision==0.8.2 torchaudio==0.7.2 cudatoolkit=10.2 -c pytorch
```

3. Install the dependencies:

```
$ cd scenerf/
$ pip install -r requirements.txt
```
4. Install tbb
```
$ conda install -c bioconda tbb=2020.2
```

5. Downgrade torchmetrics

```
$ pip install torchmetrics==0.6.0
```

6. Finally, install scenerf:

```
$ pip install -e ./
```

## Using Docker
Make sure the docker daemon is installed and running on your local machine.

1. Build docker container
```
$ docker build -t scene-rf .
```

2. Run interactive container session
```
$ docker run -it scene-rf
```

If the container should be deleted after usage, the ```-rm``` flag can be used.
If GPUs are available, the ```--gpus all``` flag can be used.
For more information, follow this [LINK](https://docs.docker.com/config/containers/resource_constraints/)


# Dataset
## KITTI dataset
1. To train and evaluate novel depths/views synthesis, please download on [KITTI Odometry website](http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/eval_odometry.php) the following data: 
    - Odometry data set (calibration files, 1 MB)
    - Odometry data set (color, 65 GB)
    - Odometry ground truth poses (4 MB)
    - Velodyne laser data, 80 GB

2. To evaluate scene reconstruction, please download **the SemanticKITTI voxel data (700 MB)** and **all extracted data for the training set (3.3 GB)**  on [Semantic KITTI download website](http://www.semantic-kitti.org/dataset.html).

3. Create a folder to store preprocess data at `/path/to/kitti/preprocess/folder`.

4. Store paths in environment variables for faster access (**Note: folder 'dataset' is in /path/to/kitti**):    

    ```
    $ export KITTI_PREPROCESS=/path/to/kitti/preprocess/folder
    $ export KITTI_ROOT=/path/to/kitti 
    ```
## Bundlefusion dataset
1. Please download 8 scenes from [Bundlefusion website](https://graphics.stanford.edu/projects/bundlefusion/) and unzip them to `/gpfsdswork/dataset/bundlefusion` (change to your dataset directory).
2. Store paths in environment variables for faster access:    
    ```
    $ export BF_ROOT=/gpfsdswork/dataset/bundlefusion
    ```

# Training
## Train KITTI
1. Create folders to store training logs at **/path/to/kitti/logdir**.

2. Store in an environment variable:

    ```
    $ export KITTI_LOG=/path/to/kitti/logdir
    ```

3. Train scenerf using 4 v100-32g GPUs with batch_size of 4 (1 item per GPU):

    ```
    $ cd scenerf/
    $ python scenerf/scripts/train_kitti.py \
        --bs=4 --n_gpus=4 \
        --enable_log=True \
        --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS \
        --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
        --logdir=$KITTI_LOG \
        --n_gaussians=4 --n_pts_per_gaussian=8  \
        --max_epochs=50 --exp_prefix=Train
    ```
## Train Bundlefusion

1. Create folders to store training logs at **/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/logs/monoscene2/bundlefusion** (Change to your directory).

2. Store in an environment variable:

    ```
    $ export BF_LOG=/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/logs/monoscene2/bundlefusion
    ```

3. Train scenerf using 4 v100-32g GPUs with batch_size of 4 (1 item per GPU):

    ```
    $ cd scenerf/
    $ python scenerf/scripts/train_bundlefusion.py --bs=4 --n_gpus=4 \
        --n_rays=2048 --lr=2e-5 \
        --enable_log=True \
        --root=$BF_ROOT \
        --logdir=$BF_LOG
    ```

# Evaluation
## Evaluate KITTI
Create folders to store intermediate evaluation data at `/path/to/evaluation/save/folder` and reconstruction data at `/path/to/reconstruction/save/folder`.

```
$ export EVAL_SAVE_DIR=/path/to/evaluation/save/folder
$ export RECON_SAVE_DIR=/path/to/reconstruction/save/folder
```
### Pretrained model on KITTI
Please download the [pretrained model](https://www.rocq.inria.fr/rits_files/computer-vision/scenerf/scenerf_kitti.ckpt).
    
### Novel depths synthesis on KITTI
Supposed we obtain the model from the training step at `/path/to/model/checkpoint/last.ckpt`. We follow the steps below to evaluate the novel depths synthesis performance. 
1. Compute the depth metrics on all frames in each sequence, additionally grouped by the distance to the input frame.

```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/save_depth_metrics.py \
    --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
    --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS \
    --model_path=/path/to/model/checkpoint/last.ckpt
```
2. Aggregate the depth metrics from all sequences.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/agg_depth_metrics.py \
    --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
    --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS
```

### Novel views synthesis on KITTI
Given the trained model at `/path/to/model/checkpoint/last.ckpt`, the novel views synthesis performance is obtained as followed:
1. Render an RGB image for every frame in each sequence.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/render_colors.py \
    --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
    --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS \
    --model_path=/path/to/model/checkpoint
```
2. Compute the metrics, additionally grouped by the distance to the input frame.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/eval_color.py --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR
```
### Scene reconstruction on KITTI
1. Generate novel views/depths for reconstructing scene.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/generate_novel_depths.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
    --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS \
    --model_path=/path/to/model/checkpoint \
    --angle=10 --step=0.5 --max_distance=10.1
```

2. Convert the novel views/depths to TSDF volume. **Note: the angle, step, and max_distance should match the previous step.**
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/depth2tsdf.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
    --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS \
    --angle=10 --step=0.5 --max_distance=10.1
```
3. Compute scene reconstruction metrics using the generated TSDF volumes.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/eval_sr.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$KITTI_ROOT \
    --preprocess_root=$KITTI_PREPROCESS
```


## Evaluate Bundlefusion
Create folders to store intermediate evaluation data at `/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/eval` and reconstruction data at `/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/recon`.

```
$ export EVAL_SAVE_DIR=/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/eval
$ export RECON_SAVE_DIR=/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/recon
```

### Pretrained model on Bundlefusion
Please download the [pretrained model](https://www.rocq.inria.fr/rits_files/computer-vision/scenerf/scenerf_bundlefusion.ckpt).
    
### Novel depths synthesis on Bundlefusion
Supposed we obtain the model from the training step at `/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/last.ckpt` (Change to your location). We follow the steps below to evaluate the novel depths synthesis performance. 
1. Compute the depth metrics on all frames in each sequence, additionally grouped by the distance to the input frame.

```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/save_depth_metrics_bf.py \
    --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT \
    --model_path=/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/last.ckpt
```
2. Aggregate the depth metrics from all sequences.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/agg_depth_metrics_bf.py \
    --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT
```

### Novel views synthesis on Bundlefusion
Given the trained model at `/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/last.ckpt`, the novel views synthesis performance is obtained as followed:
1. Render an RGB image for every frame in each sequence.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/render_colors_bf.py \
    --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT \
    --model_path=/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/last.ckpt
```
2. Compute the metrics, additionally grouped by the distance to the input frame.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/eval_color_bf.py --eval_save_dir=$EVAL_SAVE_DIR
```


## Scene reconstruction on Bundlefusion
1. Generate novel views/depths for reconstructing scene.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/generate_novel_depths_bf.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT \
    --model_path=/gpfsscratch/rech/kvd/uyl37fq/to_delete/last.ckpt \
    --angle=30 --step=0.2 --max_distance=2.1
```

2. Convert the novel views/depths to TSDF volume. **Note: the angle, step, and max_distance should match the previous step.**
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/depth2tsdf_bf.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT \
    --angle=30 --step=0.2 --max_distance=2.1
```
3. Generate the voxel ground-truth for evaluation.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/generate_sc_gt_bf.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT
```

4. Compute scene reconstruction metrics using the generated TSDF volumes.
```
$ cd scenerf/
$ python scenerf/scripts/evaluation/eval_sc_bf.py \
    --recon_save_dir=$RECON_SAVE_DIR \
    --root=$BF_ROOT
```

## Mesh extraction and visualization
Mesh can be obtained from [this line for KITTI](https://github.com/astra-vision/SceneRF/blob/main/scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/depth2tsdf.py#L107) and from [this line for Bundlefusion](https://github.com/astra-vision/SceneRF/blob/main/scenerf/scripts/reconstruction/depth2tsdf_bf.py#L119) , and drawed with open3d as following:
```
import open3d as o3d

mesh = o3d.geometry.TriangleMesh()
mesh.triangle_normals = o3d.utility.Vector3dVector(data['norms'])
mesh.vertices = o3d.utility.Vector3dVector(data['verts'])
mesh.triangles = o3d.utility.Vector3iVector(data['faces'])
mesh.vertex_colors = o3d.utility.Vector3dVector(data['colors'].astype(np.float) / 255.0)

o3d.visualization.draw_geometries([mesh])
```



# Acknowledgment
The work was partly funded by the French project SIGHT (ANR-20-CE23-0016) and conducted in the SAMBA collaborative project, co-funded by BpiFrance in the Investissement d’Avenir Program. It was performed using HPC resources from GENCI–IDRIS (Grant 2021-AD011012808, 2022-AD011012808R1, and 2023-AD011014102). We thank Fabio Pizzati and Ivan Lopes for their kind proofreading and all Astra-vision group members of Inria Paris for the insightful discussions.
